KS-DFT updates (#38)
pyscf/pyscf.github.io: source/user/dft.rst

.. _user_dft_theory:

Theory
======

In KS-DFT, as first proposed by Kohn and Sham :cite:`KohSha1965`, the electron density of a reference noninteracting system is used to represent the density of the true interacting system. As a result, the computational formulation of KS-DFT resembles that of Hartree-Fock (HF) theory, but with a different effective Fock potential. In KS-DFT, the total electronic energy is defined as follows:

.. math::

    E = T_s + E_{\rm ext} + E_J + E_{\rm xc} \ .

Here, :math:`T_s` is the noninteracting kinetic energy, :math:`E_{\rm ext}` is the energy due to the external potential, :math:`E_J` is the Coulomb energy, and
:math:`E_{\rm xc}` is the exchange-correlation (*xc*) energy. In practice, :math:`E_{\rm xc}` is approximated by a density functional approximation, which themselves may be divided into several classes along different rungs of Jacob's ladder :cite:`perdew_jacobs_ladder_aip_conf_proc_2001`:

* local density approximations (e.g. LDA; *xc* energy depends only on the electron density, :math:`\rho`), 
* generalized gradient approximations (GGA; *xc* energy also depends on the density gradient, :math:`|\nabla\rho|`), 

> * meta-GGAs (*xc* energy also depends on the kinetic energy density and Laplacian, :math:`\sum_i |\nabla \psi_i|^2`, :math:`\nabla^2\rho`),

Reviewer: It should be noted that Laplacian density functionals are not supported in PySCF.

Author: Please see commit e451415

Reviewer: OK

* non-local correlation functionals (*xc* energy involves a double integral)
* hybrid density functionals (a fraction of exact exchange is used), and
* long-range corrected density functionals (exact exchange is used with a modified interaction kernel)

> Variationally minimizing the total energy with respect to the density yields the KS equations for obtaining the non-interacting reference orbitals, on par with HF theory, and these have the same general form as the Fock equations in :numref:`theory_scf`. However, the exact exchange, :math:`\hat{K}`, is replaced by the *xc* potential, :math:`\hat{v}_{\rm xc}=\delta E_{\rm xc}/\delta \rho`. For hybrid and meta-GGA calculations, PySCF uses the generalized KS formalism :cite:`GKS`, in which the so-called generalized KS equations minimize the total energy with respect to the orbitals themselves. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Variationally minimizing the total energy with respect to the density yields the KS equations for the non-interacting reference orbitals, on par with HF theory, and these have the same general form as the Fock equations in :numref:`theory_scf`. However, the exact exchange, :math:`\hat{K}`, is replaced by the *xc* potential, :math:`\hat{v}_{\rm xc}=\delta E_{\rm xc}/\delta \rho`. For hybrid and meta-GGA calculations, PySCF uses the generalized KS formalism :cite:`GKS`, in which the so-called generalized KS equations minimize the total energy with respect to the orbitals themselves.
```

Author: Please see commit e451415

Reviewer: OK

.. _user_dft_predef_func:

Predefined *xc* Functionals and Functional Aliases
==================================================

The choice of *xc* functional is assigned via the attribute :attr:`DFT.xc`. This is a comma separated string (precise grammar discussed :ref:`below <user_dft_custom_func>`, e.g., ``xc = 'pbe,pbe'`` denotes PBE exchange plus PBE correlation. In common usage, a single name (alias) is often used to refer to the combination of a particular exchange and correlation approximation instead. To support this, PySCF will first examine a lookup table to see if :attr:`DFT.xc` corresponds to a common compound name, and if so, the implementation dispatches to the appropriate exchange and correlation forms, e.g., ``xc = 'pbe'`` directly translates to ``xc = 'pbe,pbe'``. However, if the name is not found in the compound functional table, and only a single string is given, it will be treated as an exchange functional only, e.g., ``xc = 'b86'`` leads to B86 exchange only (without correlation). Please note that earlier PySCF versions (1.5.0 or earlier)
did not support compound functional aliases, and both exchange and correlation always had to be explicitly assigned. 

> PySCF supports two independent libraries of *xc* functional implementations, namely `Libxc <https://www.tddft.org/programs/libxc/>`_ and `XCFun <https://xcfun.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_. The former of these is the default, but the latter may be chosen upon by setting ``DFT._numint.libxc = dft.xcfun``, cf. `dft/32-xcfun_as_default.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/examples/dft/32-xcfun_as_default.py>`_. For complete lists of available functionals, the user is referred to `pyscf/dft/libxc.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/pyscf/dft/libxc.py>`_ and `pyscf/dft/xcfun.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/pyscf/dft/xcfun.py>`_, respectively. For instance, the two libraries may be switched between in order to leverage features that are exclusive to one of them. The example on `dft/12-camb3lyp.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/examples/dft/12-camb3lyp.py>`_ showcases one such use case for range-separated *xc* functionals (e.g., CAM-B3LYP), as Libxc only supports the energy and nuclear gradients for this functional, but not nuclear Hessians and TD-DFT gradients, for which the XCFun library is needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PySCF supports two independent libraries of *xc* functional implementations, namely `Libxc <https://www.tddft.org/programs/libxc/>`_ and `XCFun <https://xcfun.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_. The former of these is the default, but the latter may be chosen upon by setting ``DFT._numint.libxc = dft.xcfun``, cf. `dft/32-xcfun_as_default.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/examples/dft/32-xcfun_as_default.py>`_. For complete lists of available functionals, the user is referred to `pyscf/dft/libxc.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/pyscf/dft/libxc.py>`_ and `pyscf/dft/xcfun.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/pyscf/dft/xcfun.py>`_, respectively. For instance, the two libraries may be switched between in order to leverage features that are exclusive to one of them.
```

The example is incorrect; Libxc has up to 4th derivatives for all functionals including CAM-B3LYP. I'll fix the example.

Reviewer: Omitting the list of functionals from the documentation is a good idea, since it becomes quickly outdated. The updated Libxc binding also allows querying Libxc directly for the list of supported functionals, which can be triggered by a config keyword. If users compile PySCF against the libxc master branch, PySCF can be used with functionals that are not yet included in a point release of Libxc.

Reviewer: One could consider adding an example that prints out the list of functionals in the current version of PySCF, i.e. the `XC_CODES` array in `libxc.py` and `xcfun.py`

Author: Agreed. Please see commit e451415

Reviewer: OK

  - Correspondingly, to neglect the contribution of the exchange functional (i.e. to just use a correlation functional), one should leave the first part blank, e.g., ``',vwn'`` means a functional with VWN only

  - If a compound *xc* functional is specified, no matter whether it is in the exchange part (the string in front of the comma) or the correlation part (the string behind the comma), both exchange and correlation functionals of the compound *xc* functional will be used

* The functional name can be placed in an arbitrary order.  Two names need be separated by operators ``+`` or ``-``.  Blank spaces are ignored.  NOTE the parser
  only reads the operators ``+, -, *``, while ``/`` is not supported

* A functional name can have at most one factor.  If a factor is not given, it is set to ``1``.  Compound functionals can be scaled as a unit. For example, ``.5 * b3lyp`` is equivalent to ``.1 * HF + .04 * LDA + .36 * B88, .405 * LYP + .095 * VWN``

* The string ``HF`` stands for exact exchange (HF K matrix). ``HF`` can be put in the correlation functional part (after the comma). Putting ``HF`` in the correlation part is the same as putting ``HF`` in the exchange part

> * The special string ``RSH`` means a range-separated operator. Its format is ``RSH(alpha; beta; omega)``. Another way to input range separation is to use keywords ``SR_HF`` and ``LR_HF``, e.g., ``SR_HF(.1) * alpha_plus_beta`` and ``LR_HF(.1) * alpha`` where the number in the parenthesis is the value of ``omega``

Reviewer: The RSH kernel in PySCF is based on the error function kernel; Yukawa kernels are not supported at present. (Although I think PySCF and libcint might already contain all the ingredients since the math is similar to the evaluation of f12 integrals.)

Author: Good point. Please see commit e451415

Reviewer: OK

  >>>     # A fictitious functional to demonstrate the usage
  >>>     rho0, dx, dy, dz = rho
  >>>     gamma = (dx ** 2 + dy ** 2 + dz ** 2)
  >>>     exc = .01 * rho0 ** 2 + .02 * (gamma + .001) ** .5
  >>>     vrho = .01 * 2 * rho0
  >>>     vgamma = .02 * .5 * (gamma + .001) ** (-.5)
  >>>     vlapl = None
  >>>     vtau = None
  >>>     vxc = (vrho, vgamma, vlapl, vtau)
  >>>     fxc = None # 2nd-order functional derivative
  >>>     kxc = None # 3rd-order functional derivative
  >>> return exc, vxc, fxc, kxc
  >>> dft.libxc.define_xc_(mf_hf._numint, eval_xc, xctype='GGA')
  >>> mf_hf.kernel()

By calling the :func:`dft.libxc.define_xc_` function, the customized :func:`eval_xc` function is patched to the numerical integration class ``DFT._numint`` dynamically.

For more examples of DFT *xc* functional customization, cf. `dft/24-custom_xc_functional.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/examples/dft/24-custom_xc_functional.py>`_ and `dft/24-define_xc_functional.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/examples/dft/24-define_xc_functional.py>`_.

.. _user_dft_numint:

Numerical integration grids
===========================

> PySCF implements several numerical integration grids, which can be tuned in KS-DFT calculations following the examples in `dft/11-grid_scheme.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/examples/dft/11-grid_scheme.py>`_. For instance, predefined grid may be set by using levels from ``0`` (very sparse) to ``9`` (very dense), with a default values of ``3``, cf. `pyscf/dft/gen_grid.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/pyscf/dft/gen_grid.py>`_ for more details. Likewise, the default integration grids use Bragg radii for atoms, Treutler-Ahlrichs radial grids, Becke partitioning for grid weights, the pruning scheme of NWChem, and mesh grids, which are all setting that may be overwritten:

Reviewer: I guess these grid schemes are from Turbomole, originally?

Author: I trust your knowledge on this one :). Please see commit e451415

Reviewer: OK

.. _user_dft_theory:

Theory
======

In KS-DFT, as first proposed by Kohn and Sham :cite:`KohSha1965`, the electron density of a reference noninteracting system is used to represent the density of the true interacting system. As a result, the computational formulation of KS-DFT resembles that of Hartree-Fock (HF) theory, but with a different effective Fock potential. In KS-DFT, the total electronic energy is defined as follows:

.. math::

    E = T_s + E_{\rm ext} + E_J + E_{\rm xc} \ .

Here, :math:`T_s` is the noninteracting kinetic energy, :math:`E_{\rm ext}` is the energy due to the external potential, :math:`E_J` is the Coulomb energy, and
:math:`E_{\rm xc}` is the exchange-correlation (*xc*) energy. In practice, :math:`E_{\rm xc}` is approximated by a density functional approximation, which themselves may be divided into several classes along different rungs of Jacob's ladder :cite:`perdew_jacobs_ladder_aip_conf_proc_2001`:

* local density approximations (e.g. LDA; *xc* energy depends only on the electron density, :math:`\rho`), 
* generalized gradient approximations (GGA; *xc* energy also depends on the density gradient, :math:`|\nabla\rho|`), 

> * meta-GGAs (*xc* energy also depends on the kinetic energy density and Laplacian, :math:`\sum_i |\nabla \psi_i|^2`, :math:`\nabla^2\rho`),
> * non-local correlation functionals (*xc* energy involves a double integral)
> * hybrid density functionals (a fraction of exact exchange is used), and
> * long-range corrected density functionals (exact exchange is used with a modified interaction kernel)
> * *xc* functionals that depend on the Laplacian density are, however, not implemented in PySCF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* meta-GGAs (*xc* energy also depends on the kinetic energy density and/or the density Laplacian, :math:`\sum_i |\nabla \psi_i|^2`, :math:`\nabla^2\rho`; the latter is not supported in PySCF at the moment),
* non-local correlation functionals (*xc* energy involves a double integral)
* hybrid density functionals (a fraction of exact exchange is used), and
* long-range corrected density functionals (exact exchange is used with a modified interaction kernel)
```

.. _user_dft_predef_func:

Predefined *xc* Functionals and Functional Aliases
==================================================

The choice of *xc* functional is assigned via the attribute :attr:`DFT.xc`. This is a comma separated string (precise grammar discussed :ref:`below <user_dft_custom_func>`, e.g., ``xc = 'pbe,pbe'`` denotes PBE exchange plus PBE correlation. In common usage, a single name (alias) is often used to refer to the combination of a particular exchange and correlation approximation instead. To support this, PySCF will first examine a lookup table to see if :attr:`DFT.xc` corresponds to a common compound name, and if so, the implementation dispatches to the appropriate exchange and correlation forms, e.g., ``xc = 'pbe'`` directly translates to ``xc = 'pbe,pbe'``. However, if the name is not found in the compound functional table, and only a single string is given, it will be treated as an exchange functional only, e.g., ``xc = 'b86'`` leads to B86 exchange only (without correlation). Please note that earlier PySCF versions (1.5.0 or earlier)
did not support compound functional aliases, and both exchange and correlation always had to be explicitly assigned. 

> PySCF supports two independent libraries of *xc* functional implementations, namely `Libxc <https://www.tddft.org/programs/libxc/>`_ and `XCFun <https://xcfun.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_. The former of these is the default, but the latter may be chosen upon by setting ``DFT._numint.libxc = dft.xcfun``, cf. `dft/32-xcfun_as_default.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/examples/dft/32-xcfun_as_default.py>`_. For complete lists of available functionals, the user is referred to the ``XC_CODES`` dictionaries in `pyscf/dft/libxc.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/pyscf/dft/libxc.py>`_ and `pyscf/dft/xcfun.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/pyscf/dft/xcfun.py>`_, respectively. For instance, the two libraries may be switched between in order to leverage features that are exclusive to one of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PySCF supports two independent libraries of *xc* functional implementations, namely `Libxc <https://www.tddft.org/programs/libxc/>`_ and `XCFun <https://xcfun.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_. 
The former of these is the default, but the latter may be selected by setting ``DFT._numint.libxc = dft.xcfun``, cf. `dft/32-xcfun_as_default.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/examples/dft/32-xcfun_as_default.py>`_.
For complete lists of the available density functional approximations, the user is referred to the ``XC_CODES`` dictionaries in `pyscf/dft/libxc.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/pyscf/dft/libxc.py>`_ and `pyscf/dft/xcfun.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/pyscf/dft/xcfun.py>`_, respectively.
The user can choose the library at runtime in order to leverage any of its exclusive features.

The constant maintenance and development of density functional libraries is hard work at little personal benefit, while everyone benefits from having a huge variety of density functionals in numerically stable form for use in applications.
If you use Libxc in your calculations, please cite the most up-to-date work on Libxc in your paper.
You can see the up-to-date citation on `the Libxc web page <https://www.tddft.org/programs/libxc/>_`.
At the moment, it may be
> S. Lehtola, C. Steigemann, M. J. T. Oliveira, and M. A. L. Marques
> "Recent developments in LIBXC — a comprehensive library of functionals for density functional theory"
> SoftwareX 7, 1 (2018). `DOI:10.1016/j.softx.2017.11.002 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.2017.11.002>_`
Likewise, if you use XCFun in your calculations, please cite the most up-to-date work on XCFun in your paper.
You can see the up-to-date citation on `the XCFun web page <https://github.com/dftlibs/xcfun/>_`.
At the moment, it may be
> U. Ekström, L. Visscher, R. Bast, A. J. Thorvaldsen and K. Ruud
> "Arbitrary-Order Density Functional Response Theory from Automatic Differentiation"
> J. Chem. Theory Comput. 6, 1971 (2010), `DOI:10.1021/ct100117s <https://doi.org/10.1021/ct100117s>_`
Please check your log files for the library that was used in your calculation. (You may need to increase the `verbose` setting of your calculation to see this.)
```

  >>> from pyscf import dftd3
  >>> mf_hf_d3 = dftd3.dftd3(dft.RKS(mol_hf))
  >>> mf_hf_d3.kernel()
  
Alternatively, non-local correlation may be added through the VV10 functional :cite:`vydrov_voorhis_vv10_functional_jcp_2010`, cf. `dft/33-nlc_functionals.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/examples/dft/33-nlc_functionals.py>`_:

  >>> mf_hf.xc = 'wb97m_v'
  >>> mf_hf.nlc = 'vv10'
  >>> mf_hf.grids.atom_grid = {'H': (99, 590), 'F': (99, 590)}
  >>> mf_hf.grids.prune = None
  >>> mf_hf.nlcgrids.atom_grid = {'H': (50, 194), 'F': (50, 194)}
  >>> mf_hf.nlcgrids.prune = dft.gen_grid.sg1_prune
  >>> mf_hf.kernel()
  
It's important to keep in mind that the evaluation of the VV10 functional involves a double grid integration, so differences in grid size can make an enormous difference in time.

.. _user_dft_pbc:

Periodic Boundary Conditions
============================

> Besides finite-sized systems, PySCF further supports KS-DFT calculations with PBCs for performing solid-state calculations. The APIs for molecular and crystalline input parsing has deliberately been made to align to the greatest extent possible, and an all-electron KS-DFT calculation at the :math:`\Gamma`-point using density fitting (recommended) and a second-order SCF algorithm, requires input on par with a standard KS-DFT calculation for a chemical Hamiltonian (cf. `pbc/11-gamma_point_all_electron_scf.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/examples/pbc/11-gamma_point_all_electron_scf.py>`_):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides finite-sized systems, PySCF further supports KS-DFT calculations with PBCs for performing solid-state calculations. The APIs for molecular and crystalline input parsing has deliberately been made to align to the greatest extent possible, and an all-electron KS-DFT calculation at the :math:`\Gamma`-point using density fitting (recommended) and a second-order SCF algorithm, requires input on par with a standard molecular KS-DFT calculation (cf. `pbc/11-gamma_point_all_electron_scf.py <https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf/blob/master/examples/pbc/11-gamma_point_all_electron_scf.py>`_):
```

"chemical Hamiltonian" is an ambiguous term; I associate it with the approach of Istvan Mayer from the late 1980s and 1990s, see e.g. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/qua.560230203. I don't think it is available in PySCF. I would just omit the

Author: Agreed. Please see commit ae2db6c

Reviewer: OK
